# Dos Ramas Arriba

It was a little daunting at first you're talkin about an environment that if you go missing they're not going to find you or your remains. I was the first person to go up to the plot where we would be building the earthbag homes. My father had been to this mountain one time before to discuss a potential hunting business with the natives, who he knew through another Costa Rican friend in the Central Valley. We looked long and hard for Landon limone because we wanted to live in this part of the world and we didn't even know why at the time. Probably one of the big incentives for my father was the price. Landon Costa Rica had started to become very very expensive, and there was a lot of trouble around the beaches in places like this and a lot of high prices in other parts of Costa Rica. As of the writing of this book, in late 2021, you can pay up to 400,000 US dollars for a single ha in novita which is the southern part of Costa Rica on the Pacific side. Our budget was not so grandiose we were looking for land somewhere around five or ten thousand US dollars for a ha. When we heard that there was an entire ha available on the mountain my father had gone to speak with the natives with he bought it sight unseen. I was the first one to come up to the mountain and report to him the plot of land we had bought and what it was like. When I surveyed the land it was grown in. There were no trees. It was clear that it had been cleared for farming sometime in the past but abandoned, and when that happens there's usually a big growth that comes in and takes over, usually about waist-high or a little bit higher than that and this is standard rainforest that has been dtreet but not maintained and it was a sloping Hill off to the right and our Lance a top on top of a small Crest in the bowl 7km up the dirt road. Aesthetics they better the Vista was unparalleled. I stepped foot on the land and I was completely enamored by the beauty. For a 19 year old Canadian boy from Mississauga ontario-- I was remarkably well traveled. Both my mother and my father made sure that I saw various parts of the world in my early teen years

# The Talamanca mountains

I had seen a fair bit of the world by the time I came to Costa Rica. Most of it was incidental. When I was thirteen, a friend of my father's was getting married in India. She invited him to the wedding, and he decided it would be an excellent opportunity for me to commence my understanding of the world.

## India

## Portugal

how sold with who description

## Croatia

how sold with who description

## Italy

how sold with who description France

and parts of the US so the concept of coming to a new country and adapting to a culture was nothing new, although this time, I wasn't momentarily adapting for a mere few weeks, I was embedded in a mountain pueblo, seven kilometers up a winding, pothole ridden dirt and gravel road with campesinoes and Cabecar natives.

Upon my initial trip to Costa Rica my father and I went the traditional route and simply rented a Cabina along the beach in a gated community and lived a very western lifestyle.

## First Visit

Bejuco beach lifestyle gym John gated community driving Christmas at home Return

Little did I know that in the year to follow, upon my return to Costa Rica, I was going to make my way up to the Talamanca mountains. Initially I was sent to live with their closest neighbor on the mountain and acquire the workforce necessary to build up our property this proved to be a more difficult task than I had imagined, being a woefully ignorant 19 year old suburban boy, yeah, I undertook the challenge as if it were a test of my endurance and ability to take on this world, so I ran with it, and in the end it has proven to be the single most enriching and fruitful experience I've ever had the courtesy of indulging in. This journey sewed doubt in me at times and forced me to produce work even when circumstance made it seem impossible. I took residence with a man named Alexander as he was the man who sold us this parcel of land, amounting to approximately one hectare and he helped source labor for the construction of our first house, which ended up primarily being his family, with a couple of individuals who were not from the immediate family, but were associates or known entities. Once the manpower had been acquired, eight people at first, we went to work and with my limited knowledge in construction that I had acquired over a couple summers of interlocking and contracting work. This gave me a solid base to work with, but my only expertise in earth bag construction, which was our construction method of choice, was no more than a guidebook on how to build using earth bag. So envision a 19-year-old from the suburbs living in the dense tropical rain forest of Costa Rica, known as the Talamanca mountains, having to man a crew of grown men, some well into their 50's and built in a method that none of them had even heard of. I myself had never even attempted this method of construction prior to our undertaking of this project, I was happy to do it. . . at first. As construction underwent, there would prove to be many trials and tribulations that would pop up to impede our journey, but with a great deal of perseverance I am writing this from the confines of our earthbag house. It took a bit of work and a greater understanding of the Spanish language before I could confidently delegate work to my workers and also keep my father informed as to the progress of the construction. My father during the initial stages of construction, was living in San Jose, which is approximately 2 1/2 hours away from where I was working and living. That meant that should there be any issue medically, mentally or anything of the like, nobody would come for me that wasn't immediately in my vicinity many of these people I had only just met and I had to put my complete faith in them. These people are very simple, with a few of them being mostly illiterate and barely having an elementary level of education, nonetheless, their ability to come up with various methods for skimming money off of almost anything we did was astounding. As construction persisted, the issues were not only in sourcing supplies or other trivial matters pertaining to almost all construction, but it also turned out that the people we were working with we're always looking to skim a little bit of extra money for themselves, no matter what situation occurred, for example, Alexander decided that it would be a good idea to tell the driver of one of our supply trucks transporting crushed stone for the project, that he should tack on extra cost after negotiation was done, so that he could also skim some of the profit from the transportation and the goods. At the time he thought I could not understand, as my Spanish was limited, but even then, I understood what was happening and immediately informed my father who would periodically halt all work due to these manufactured interruptions. This mentality of trying to skim money from "El Gringo" every step of the way persists even to this day, although now we've come a long way with those issues. There were problems stemming from my lack of experience. For example, we managed to construct about 10 crossings of the walls before we realized that we haven't even staggered the earth bags and for any of those who are not privy to basic construction methods, staggering your blocks or earth bags, in this case, is one of the core aspects of structural stability. Needless to say my father was quite angry about that when he realized, although he had seen photos of the progress and failed to realize himself, so all the work and all the walls had to be taken down and we were forced to start from scratch. In retrospect these mistakes served to only bolster our resolve and deepen our understanding, not without many an argument. We persisted and ended up cutting two workers from the crew as they were excess fat that needed to be trimmed. We started to get some degree of efficiency in the work and I managed to get every coursing of the walls up except for the last three courses before I returned to Canada. Those last three courses that were done after my departure turned out horribly, so much so that the people building the roof, who were professional contractors took it upon themselves to redo the last three coursings of the wall. This theme of laziness and lack of productivity under the lack of supervision and attempts to score extra money without actually providing any work or reason have always been an issue and will probably be an issue as long as we live in this country. Now when you take into account the amount of money everything cost, including the useless expenditure on these attempts to get money, it's hard to be too angry, as generally the whole process cost far less than it would in North America. Nonetheless, my father felt as though his money was being wasted in a lot of ways and I was hard-pressed to argue against that. I would leave every weekend to visit my father in San Jose to relay information and spend some time with an English-speaking individual, because as I stated before, my Spanish was limited, basically leaving me to be mostly a mute while living up here in Talamanca mountains. This was not a big issue for me as I typically can go large sums of time just reflecting inwardly, solitude is my fortitude as I like to say. Nonetheless, it took quite a toll and as my father will tell you, I was always keen to talk endlessly and about trivial matters upon my arrival in San Jose, simply for the sake of being able to speak English and communicate to any great degree. Now this may seem like I'm complaining or reflecting negatively upon the experience, but the experience served to heighten my ability to communicate not only in this new language, Spanish, but it also aided me greatly in all matters of communication. As I explain my journey I don't want anyone to think that I have any contempt or any regret for any part of it. I just wish to get across the difficulty and how much work it was to accomplish even the simplest of tasks or anything of substance. Let me tell you, when you do accomplish anything in this environment you must really take note and pat yourself on the back for a job well done, because not only is the climate brutal to work in but everything is made far more difficult trying to work with locals which is all I had. These people are now our family as my father has married in to the family that at one point served to stand in the way of our journey and this has only let up substantially over the last couple of years as my father has lived here in perpetuity for five years. yet even he still incurs this issue from time to time. One thing worth noting is that you cannot take it personally, as these people have a tendency to do these things to each other and when you see family nickel and diming one another you can't help but realize that it isn't simply you they're targeting, they do it to themselves.
