# Early Travels

I had seen a fair bit of the world by the time I went to Costa Rica. India was my first exposure to a culture vastly different from my own. A friend of my father's was getting married in India when I was thirteen. She invited him to the wedding, and he decided it would be an excellent opportunity for me to experience a rich culture. It was a Sikh wedding – five days of ceremonies and ornate rituals – but that is not what I remember about the trip. I remember the four hour train ride in the common car with goats and chickens. We were supposed to be met at the airport by a chauffeur and brought to the house of my father's friend, as she came from a wealthy family and could afford such luxuries. No one met us at the airport. We were forced to make our way alone for the first three weeks in this new culture and environment. It turned out our friend's family was not thrilled she had invited a white Canadian and his son. They felt it may look inappropriate to the groom's family as this marriage was very traditional. It allowed for an extremely raw experience. Much of which cannot be articulated and must be felt. We went without a single reservation in place, and no anticipation we would be using the public train systems and local taxis.

The first thing we noticed on arrival in New Delhi was the pungent smell. Upon stepping foot outside the airport we were taken aback by something similar to burning garbage and fecal matter. It really is something. It hits you all of a sudden when the sliding glass doors of the modern airport open. We assumed it was localized to the airport. We had no reason for this assumption. We just could not believe an entire city smelled like this. It did. Some twenty-four million lived in this olfactory nightmare. In three days it was our new normal, and we hardly even noticed it anymore. Human beings are remarkably adaptable. The other thing we noticed almost imeddiately upon delving into the city was the fire. The poor of the city burned whatever they could to stay warm – scrap wood, tires, two liter plastic soda bottles – and it all created this haze of toxicity that made our eyes water by the third day.

The level of poverty was inconcievable at the age of thirteen. Back in 2011 the rate of open defecation in New Delhi was around forty percent and seventy percent in rural areas. We sometimes saw children younger than myself bathing in open sewage and huffing glue through rags. People like to invision a blazing inferno called Hell. After witnessing some of the lives in Delhi, I wondered if such a place is even necessary. The train ride through Punjab province cost us less than three dollars each. We had decided to travel in the common section. Passengers brought goats and chickens. Hermaphrodites periodically marched the aisles in small bands. Everyone gave them coin and avoided eye contact, like they were thugs. A lady told my father to give them coin, too, or they would curse us. My father scorned them, and they made these ridiculous hand gestures, like sprinkling water from their fingers, then they left. We made nothing of it, but it was quite the show for other passengers nearby. The seats in the common section were like church pews, and the people were packed in like a sardine can, shoulder to shoulder. My father and I spent hours watching the countryside pass. Outside of New Delhi, going north in the Province of Punjab, the country became less dense, more green, and more beautiful, and smells of New Delhi gave way to country smells, even fragrances.

We went to various places, other cities, small towns, or, rather, small for India. The contrasting ways of life were remarkable, from urbane to rural primitive – small plot farming with handheld tools and oxen, merchant towns with piles of harvested food or walls of factories – and everywhere we saw something unique or different, like the place could not be templated. Even trying to describe it is like trying to catch a wisp of smoke in your palms. It was there and it wasn't there. It seemed to come and go, like it had a pulse. The raw intensity of it brings you to a baseline now, a constant sensory intoxication by overstimulation.

In Amritsar we went to the famous Golden Temple of the Sikh religion. Sikh Variable**

We visited an ashram in Beas, India. This is the most spiritually charged place I have ever been. Getting somewhere within a kilometer of it, I was hit with a surge of energy that I could only describe as walking through an invisible force field. Immediately my body felt lighter and hunger dissipated. We participated in a satsang where over one hundred thousand people gathered to meditate in the presence of a master. Everyone was fed a hearty meal for free. The local farmers provided the food and women cooked in enormous cauldrons. For all the poverty in Delhi, India is very rich in spiritual equity.

When I was fifteen, my mother and stepfather took me on a three week trip to Portugal. Family friends and their son, who I had known since kindergarten, joined the trip. We arrived in Terceira, an island just off the coast. The natural environment and architecture were wonders unto themselves. My grandfather had been a street cobbler on the island. I saw work he had done forty years prior. It held up well – Portuguese work ethic. I ate a steady supply of fresh seafood and drank cold tap beer, a drinking age being non existent so long as a parent was present.

This three week trip allowed me to get a taste of my mother's native culture. I arrived in the midst of Festival du Praia, an annual celebration on Terceira. We did a lot of sight-seeing. My stepfather was slightly unnerved. The roads wound through hills – sharp turns and steep cliffs – and I could see the tension and stress caused by roads built for horses and buggies. My mother and stepfather were almost run off a cliff by a truck driver staring at his phone. When we arrived on the scene their vehichle had a quarter of its body hanging off a ninety foot sheer rock cliff.

It wasn't until I went to the Festival du Praia that I was free to do as I pleased. My friend, Tiago, and I popped in and out over the course of a week, drank beer and ogled the beautiful young women. Foreigners were attractive to them. The lifestyle was relaxed and depression seemed non-existent. At lunch all the shops closed for two hours, a daily occurrence on the island. We traveled to a couple other islands and everything except the vista was the same. I gained a deeper understanding and respect for the culture my mother emigrated from at the age of eleven.

When I finished high school I took a year to think. My good friend Dario informed me he would be returning to his native country of Croatia to pursue his studies in medicine. I was invited to stay with him in a small town outside the capital, Split. With the blessing and bankroll of my mother, I was on my way there two weeks after graduating high school. I was struck by the beauty of Split, the architecture, while captivated by their ability to retain a modern infrastructure without sacrificing beauty. The plan was to enjoy the town for four days, then make our way to Split for Ultra Europe, the second largest music festival in the world. The two experiences were bookends in energy and pace. Life in Dario's village was calm, very similar to the island life of Portugal. Fresh sea food, beer on tap, and many beautiful women eager to make my acquaintance, every sixteen-year-old's dream, and I was living it with a trusted friend in an old European country.

Most days were spent on the beach, drinking cheap wine with locals and getting to know one another. Unfortunately, this is where I started smoking tobacco. I somehow convinced myself that I would be able to drop it once I returned home. No such luck.

This last travel experience breaks the sequence. It happened before Croatia. I place it here because of the impact it had on me. In grade ten my Catholic high school – we have a separate, publicly funded Catholic school system in Canada, Jesuit legacy – took a trip to France and Italy. I jumped on the chance and my mother and father were keen to provide the opportunity.

The first destination was Paris. We spent a week in Europe's most celebrated city. I experienced their fine cuisine and a rich culture. The Parisians are not the friendliest of people toward outsiders. So long as your money is good, they typically keep their petty remarks to themselves. I was mesmerized by the rich history that surrounded me. I learned about the various wars and artists so prolific in their history. The Mona Lisa in the Louvre was a little depressing. I had imagined a much larger painting. France had been a global superpower for many years. Its exploits are well documented. I enjoyed Paris, but, should I ever return to France, you will not find me anywhere but the rural areas, hanging out with townspeople who do not exude the Parisian superiority complex.

We chartered a train to Florence after our time in Paris. I immediately took a liking to the locals. They were far more welcoming and maintained all the luxuries the French were so proud of – excellent food, beautiful architecture, and a rich history which overshadowed Paris. As with the other European locals I had seen, there was a calm among the people, a lack of rush and pace like North America. They were a culture. We were a factory. I did not word it that way when I was sixteen. It was just a sense for which I later found language. Italians smiled, and they were jovial all day. They took the time to be courteous to foreigners. My school trip had planned to visit the Vatican, but the timing of Pope Francis was unplanned. I was navigating the winding stairs to the top of the Vatican with some friends when his ascension was announced. I was thoroughly unimpressed with the Vatican and the historical event of that day. The architecture was impressive, but the culture seemed dated, a part of an old world, and, without intent to offend the followers of my birth religion, there was an omniscient presence there, and certainly not what my mind had imagined as the holy spirit. It felt like walking through a graveyard at night. This was the extent of my travel and knowledge of the world before I went to Costa Rica.
