# First and Returning Home

In my first two month stay in Costa Rica my father rented a house in Bejuco, a beach on the Pacific coast, midway between the northern and southern border of the thin Central American country. It was a gated community -- North American lifestyle and security. Most residents hardly spoke Spanish and did not have to in that microcosm. The community was maintained by gardeners and security, large fencing along the perimeter. We heard a story from a local living three houses down. He had been educated in Canada, Montreal actually, and he spoke French, He and his family had been rendered unconscious in their sleep by a gas pumped into the house. Their valuables were snatched up, and the robbers were never seen or heard. It was unsettling, but we went on with our stay in the bizarre little gated microcosm and gave it little thought.

There was a retired American women living with her dog and a man nobody ever saw. She asked that we chain and muzzle our dog, a pit bull and boxer mix, every time she sallied out of her home at the end of the laneway, a couple hundred meters from us. She had this nasal twang that she spoke in, like British royalty with an American accent chastising the help. These days people would call her a _Karen_, but she was old in 2015, and the term Karen had not come into fashion. She might have been the template -- _cannn yooouuuu put youuuur dog on a leaaaash, pleeeeease_ -- and the please had the hardest _sarcastic_ accent of the sentence, as though it was a formality she mocked. We rarely saw her man because she embarrassed the hell out of him. We know because we passed him walking their poodle alone a few times, and he apologized for her. Poor bastard. Till death do them part. She came to be symbolic of everything my father and I despised about North Americans abroad. She was apparently the head of the condominium board in that gated community, and her contempt for _renters_ was palpable. Her skin was a spray tan brown -- yes, spray tan in Costa Rica -- and she was as wrinkled as a one hundred year old woman. She had this outrageous blond dye on her teased out perm, like a septuagenarian member of _Charlie's Angels_ -- an American caricature abroad.

I started watching movies and television in Spanish with English subtitles. Right from the get go I was keen to learn this new language. My first articulate expression was _plata o plomo_. a line uttered by Pablo Escobar in Narcos season one. It translates to, _silver or lead_. Silver is what they call money in Spanish, some kind of direct line back to Judas, I suppose. As an eighteen year old fresh out of high school, I wanted to venture out on my own and began taking the bus daily to Costa Rica's most popular beach town a dozen kilometers away. Jaco was chalk full of degeneracy. Anything from prostitution to drug usage. I liked the fancy gyms, gorgeous beach, ice cold beer and natural beauty of latin women. It was during one of my workouts that I met John. He was a Vietnam veteran who had spent his life after military service in this part of Costa Rica, sometimes visiting his family back home in the States. He also had a family in Costa Rica, grown children and a wife he no longer lived with. The man was sixty-five and maintained a good physique, no doubt to impress the young women he paid for, one way or another, even if he thought they loved him. His stories were non-linear and hard to follow, but the guy could not stop talking. Cocaine and prostitutes were as common as breakfast for him and the men like him who bought condos in Jaco. He always caught me at the end of a workout and would ramble on for a half hour or so. He disappeared for a couple of weeks, and, upon returning, informed me that he had brain surgery after he had been hit in the back of the head with a metal pipe. It was never stated, but I assumed it was a prior feud, likely over a prostitute or an unpaid drug debt. Jaco is a cesspool. It served to remind me how poorly most Americans comport themselves in other cultures. These people didn't want to adapt and embed themselves in the culture; they wanted to party and have their desires met. I enjoyed two months of darting between Bejuco and Jaco, picking up some Spanish along the way, but it wasn't where I was meant to be.

I went home for Christmas and returned in the new year. My father and I were looking to buy property. I was raised in Mississauga, Ontario, named after the Mississauga people of the Algonquin native confederacy, though, in all the time I have lived there I have never met a Canadian native of any band or tribe. Mississauga is the sixth largest municipality in Canada and the largest in the Greater Toronto Area, with approximately a million people as of this writing. It started out as cottage country in the nineteen-twenties. Rich Torontonians built small cottages along Lake Ontario. As Toronto grew, so did Mississauga. Italians and Portugese moved from the city to the suburb, along with Poles, Ukranians, and other Europeans. Indians and Pakistanis carved out the northern part of Peel region -- Brampton -- while in later years Muslims became prolific in central Mississauga, Hurontario and Eglinton Avenue. My father and I actually danced zikr with the Mevlevi order of Sufis every Saturday for a year. The shiekh lived eight doors down from my father. My father taught me the value of spiritual exploration and practice. He has been a lifelong meditator. It was part of the reason we made the India trip together and went to the ashram in Beas, Punjab. There are a lot of Filipinos, too, and they were a demographic at my grade school and high school. Aesthetically and culturally, Mississauga is kind of a _shithole_, as my father says. I see it differently because I was born there, in the Mississauga General Hospital, June second, nineteen-ninety-seven, a millenial as we're called.

I was never put in daycare, as I had my Portugese grandmother and grandfather living close to the grade school where I started junior kindergarten and finished the eighth grade. My grandfather Frank -- Fransesco -- walked over and picked me up every day after school. My grandmother would be waiting for me with hugs and food. They hardly spoke English, so I grew up listening to Portugese. It helped immensely in learning Spanish. I passed my father's ability with Spanish quite quickly, and he's something of a polyglot, speaking rudimentary French, Mandarin, and now, after years, good Spanish.

Mississauga had a world famous mayor when I was growing up, Hazel Mcallion. She built the city over the course of her tenure, which was right from the start. Mississauga was cow pastures before Hazel. It is diverse, a deliberate integration of socialized housing in middle class communities, though how much of that was Hazel and how much was provincial policy foisted on her I do not know. Hazel was old school, the embodiment of the Biblical aphorism from Thessalonians: _If anyone is not willing to work, let him not eat._

There are parts of Mississauga you will never see socialized housing, like Mississauga Road, with its multi-million dollar homes and huge lots. Canada's hockey voice, Don Cherry, lived there. There are well kept parks and recreational centers dotted throughout every community. Mississauga had the largest shopping mall in Canada for quite some time, Square One, a consumer Mecca. I hung out there a lot with my friends when I was around twelve.

My father and mother divorced when I was two and a half years old. It did not hit me as an emotional event in my life until I was five, then I kept asking them if they were ever going to get back together. They were resolute in their positions -- no. At twenty-four I understand completely why they divorced. It was hard on me, but they were both so devoted to me. My mother stayed single until I was twelve years old. My father had one partner for a few years, but he did not want to start another family, so that woman had to move on. My father stayed single until he came to Costa Rica. He stayed in Mississauga and raised me, even though he hated the place. From eight years old until thirteen years old I spent every weekday in the summers with my father, then slept over on Saturdays. We loved being together. He worked contracts as a technical writer in software and telecommunications, so he just made sure he was not working in the summers. By the standards of most people in Mississauga, my father lived rough -- mattress on the floor, lentils with rice and curry being his staple diet, no car, and no great material wealth in his life. What little money he saved went to things like our trip to India. He maintained a regime of breathing and motion exercises he learned when he lived in Taiwan, meditation, and writing. He was like a monk, even maintaining the vegetarian diet for a decade.

I practiced these skills daily when I was with my father. He must have been Chinese in a past life. We also read aloud. The foundational education was astounding as I look back upon it now. We would sit cross-legged on the floor and he would read -- Cormac McCarthy's _The Road_, The _Tao Te Ching_, Chuang Tsu's _Inner Chapters_, _The One Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa_, and too many more to list here -- all read aloud in a tiny basement apartment in Mississauga. He knew exactly when to stop and talk about the text, like he was reading my mind. My mother entered me into Taekwondo when I was nine because she saw me practicing the kung fu horse stance at home. I received my black belt at sixteen.

We spent a lot of time at a coffee shop near my father's home. He would work on his writing, either technical writing for a contract or a novel he was working on, and he had me write short stories, checking them for grammar and sequencing. This took my linguistic ability to a level that my teachers could hardly believe possible for a ten year old. I was accused of plagiarizing a couple of times, though, at the time, I did not know what plagiarism was. It was always a colorful cast of characters at the coffee shop, many of whom were good friends with my father. We would go to movies and play video games together, but most of our time was purely constructive. I will never forget the intense Kung Fu sessions, hours of meditation, and the reading aloud and writing that was done in that decade. These disciplines have allowed me to excel in anything I have ever invested in, including this journey on the mountain. It also made it very difficult to fall in line and follow the linear path Western society is so keen on pushing into the next generation. It became crystal clear when creative writing was removed from our curriculum in grade five. I'm extremely thankful that my father never packed it in and moved elsewhere. A lot of my friends' fathers did, and I bear witness to the wounds even now in their mid-twenties.

Mississauga nurtured me under the tutelage of my mother and father. I was provided with a safe place to grow up and be a normal child, never getting on a school bus, always walking distance to my Catholic grade school and high school. My teachers cared about their jobs -- seeing it as more than just a job. I'm grateful for my wonderful childhood, but, from sixteen onward, Mississauga was not the place for me. I was restless and I had my father's wanderlust. I spent a quick Christmas in Missisauga then I went back to Costa Rica
