# JUDGES FEAR NARCO IN

Repeated lack of support in the Judiciary Before the resignations of judges for threats and aggression. In Court Plena, the judge was not backed up and only his resignation was accepted. The resignation of a judge named Salazar to his place in the Court of the I Judicial Circuit of the Atlantic Zone, following a series of direct attacks, threats and health effects outrages the union groups of the Judiciary. He transcended that Salazar was sent to kill, so he was given protection and an investigation was initiated, which was suspended because they failed to determine who gave the order, so the security measures were removed. The judge fractured his jaw, legs, lost a tendon of one finger and was given two bullets, which is why he was hospitalized for two months. Despite this they sent him back to the Court of Lemon. Maria Victoria Salas, General Secretary of the Judiciary Syndicate (Sindijud), pointed out how serious the situation and the lack of support the judge received by the institution. The lack of protection, the not having given him the tools to continue receiving his salary in such a way that he was protected, there are thousands of precautionary measures that could have been taken, typical and atypical, to guarantee him p rotation to your life, because your physical health already and mental had been seriously injured, unfortunately the loss of a human resource is evident. The Court must reflect and provide to this fellow and anyone else what they require," he said. He also mentioned the lack of leadership of the Judiciary Dome and the Protection Program, after so passively accepting resignations without fighting to protect the human resource. Outrageous On his part, Jorge Cartín, Secretary General of the Syndicate of Judicial Workers (Sitrajud), said that the case was known with the suspension of the live session of the Plenary Court, then through a contact they knew the situation of pri My hand. We are outraged by these situations that are given within the Judiciary because it is not possible that when an official or an official is in a state of vulnerability for his health and his own life, but also that of his family, does not exist at least is any initiative to save it from these threats; not only to prevent them from giving, but to, if given, have alternatives to protect you," he said. Cartín insisted that it is not possible for his life to be vulnerable and that the Judicature reasign him in the same position exposing him to new aggressions, which pushed him to resign, after taking the disappointment that the entity for which he fought so much The gods are here back. We are very worried about the situation of this judge because it happens to all judges, prosecutors and public defenders, even in the Judiciary we believe that it was a big mistake to re-named him in the same place where all these things happened to him s and we believe the protocol of security for our fellow judges should have important variations considering that what is at stake is health, is the lives of people, I think it has been a mistake of the Court to have named it again there," commented Mario Mena, de Judicial Employees Association (Anejud). He added that this is not only happening to this judge, but it has happened to other people who may not have filed a complaint or have not made their case known. This despite the fact that Costa Rica is a country where the danger has increased exponentially, but there is no good system of protection for judges, prosecutors and public defenders, which is why all union groups ensure that the Court will have to make changes, before the staff The Judiciary decides to quit his job.
