# Justin

When I returned to Costa Rica I brought my good friend Justin whom I've known since kindergarten. He took me up on the offer to come here and work on the property. Due to the fact that he spent a great deal of his youth wandering and exploring the outdoors many aspects of this character seamlessly fit in. The first house had been built but didn't have electricity. My father decided to rent a property at the base of the mountain and have Justin and I trek up to work every morning. Luckily Justin is the best driver I've ever known and he was happy to drive most of the time. I'm a decent driver but manual driving was new to me so having him was a blessing. The maneuvers I saw him pull behind the wheel would put stunt drivers to shame. Route thirty two, the only highway in this region, has the highest fatality rate of all roadways in the country. This is due to a combination of weather, geography, and sharp bends. Justin didn't even bat an eye at this idea. We would take our Mitsubishi Montero to and from Siquirres bringing tonnes of materials up to the property. Back then Justin and I were habitual marijuana smokers, something my father was not too happy with at the time. As long as we were getting our work done he couldn't say too much as it was our only libation. We set out working on separate structures such as a bodega, a bathing room, and our magnum opus, the triplex. Following the pace and rhythm set on the first construction we commenced work with the same crew as before. We tried a few new ideas many of which were successful whilst others not so much. We had got it into our heads that we wanted to build a chicken coop out of bamboo as little afternoon project. We had failed to realize how much fresh bamboo weighs. After strapping a bundle to the roof of our Suzuki samurai we managed to get halfway to the property before it tore off the entire roof rack. We still got the bamboo up to the property manually, one by one. Still, that chicken coup was built but it didn't turn out as expected, probably due to our inexperience with bamboo. During construction my father was working for TD Bank which over the course of a few months drove him to the brink of insanity. Couple that with the little tricks people on the mountain tried to pull on us and it was the angriest I had ever seen him. It made it difficult to convene with him as much of his time was occupied. The little free time he had he didn't want to hear about issues in the construction process. The bodega and the bathing room turned out much better having gone smoothly and the way we had expected, leaving little room for improvement. We began living on the mountain as the electrical was working and we even managed to get internet up here being the first on the mountain to have it. Back then our neighbours would sometimes visit just to poach some internet. This led to some interesting convesations as we were able to show them what snow looked like or how Eskimos live in Northern Canada. Living on the mountain in my home was a feeling I cannot lay word to. It was the greatest sense of accomplishment I've ever felt. Now we could wake up ten minutes before work and make coffee as the crew showed up for the day. We took a barren piece of land in the middle of the jungle and turned into a comfortable place to live. It is hard to fathom even to this day. The construction of the triplex would be our largest undertaking which made sense for us at the time as we were at the peak of our earthbag building prowess and so was the crew. This process went flawlessly and the results are spectacular. The walls perfectly plum, the symmetry being quite evident, and the roof coming together in the blink of an eye. It was magical to see the efficiency and pride involved in its construction.

Justin and I spent a total of six months in Costa Rica making two trips to Panama during our stay. We spent our time in Panama on an island called Boca Del Toro. Boca is a fun tourist centered part of Panama residing at the border between the two countries. This provided the rest and relaxation we needed. We'd go to the clubs and party with foreigners, mostly Europeans. Acquiring weed on the island was quite the undertaking. Typically taking place in poorly lit alleyways, seeming like a maze once you're in there. No harm came to us as we know how to carry ourselves and you'd be hard pressed to find anyone who sees us as an easy target. We made some good memories in Boca, most of which will have to stay there because our parents might read this book. Another good friend of mine, Sam, made the trip down to Costa Rica for two weeks. We stopped the construction and set forth on a journey all over Costa Rica. We experienced a few small towns but were mostly interested in both the Caribbean beaches and pacific ones. During this time the two of them got a PHD in Costa Rican beach life. We would bar hop every night, sometimes picking up some women along the way. The nights were long and the days were spent hungover on the beach, sipping a beer to hydrate. It was in the beach town of Puerto Viejo that I became violently ill spending three days in a hostel. I'll never forget waking up at three in the morning running to the bathroom and having the worst diarrhea imaginable coupled with a consistent projectile vomiting. Apologies for the mental image, but I want to do justice to the level of suffering I endured. This all occurred in a room filled with twelve people. I can still remember a girls voice coming out of the dark room "ewwwww" and me apologizing like the true Canadian I am. We returned to the mountain after my recovery which consisted of laying in a hammock all day drinking water. We spent a few more days with Sam and he was able to see what building a life abroad was really about. After Sam's departure Justin and I finished work on the property, finally completing the triplex even having done the roof ourselves. This was my proudest moment as all the workers and myself we're very proud of the results. Many of the crew members brought friends and family to see what they had done. We had members of the local indigenous tribe visit to see what we had done. The triplex now stands as a monument to how far we've come. It was blessing having a good friend, a brother, work on this project with me. He is always welcome here and his contributions will be here for ten generations to come.
