# Building on the Mountain

**finding the land**

The man we trusted to show us available lots was a brother of my father's friend. His name is Gerardo Rojas. My father had been visiting Costa Rica periodically since 1991 and had acquired a few friends along the way. Whilst my father was busy tech writing daily, I was sent to scout these potential properties. I peroused a few lots with Gerardo that were in the region of Limon, Costa Rica. Gerardo was native to this part of the country. At the time my Spanish was elementary at best and I relied heavily on Gerardo to guide me. Limon province, for those who don't know, is considered, even among Costa Ricans, to be the most dangerous part of the country due to the high degree of criminality. Stemming from the fact that it contains the main port bringing in foreign goods and narcotics. We recieved this warning numerous times, but persisted as we knew land would be cheaper. On one of these trips, Gerardo mangaed to steal the equivalent of $200 from me. He also took us to see a lot that he claimed was the deal of a life time. It turned out that the man selling it didn't even own it. Luckily, the second plot we were shown was much deeper into the Talamanca mountains and was owned by the seller. We instantly fell in love with it. It is a hectare of land that is perched at the peak of a mountain. The view from this property is gorgeous in every direction. To the West is a view of the jungle canopy with rolling mountain ranges opening up to a view of Turrialba and its volcanoe, only being visible when the cloud coverage is minimal. To our South is a clear view of Barillo national park, nothing but pure jungle and home to the Cabacar natives and the mountain's greatest mysteries. To the East you can catch a world class sunrise along with clouds that roll in during a rainfall, sometimes being so thick it looks like the mountain is sitting atop clouds. After finding this diamond in the ruff Gerardo became an unecessary burden and we cut him loose. I imgaine he's either dead, in prison, or high on a serious narcotic. We quickly purchased the hectare of land for $5000, about half the original asking price as the man who sold it to us, Alexander, was having a medical emergency and needed the money. I was sent to the mountain to begin construction on our earth bag house. My father was in San Jose working a tech writing contract based out of Canada. It was in the financial sector and he was stressed out all the time. Most weeks were fifty-five hours, some more. He hated it, but it was the seed money for the land and construction on the mountain.

My week began with a bus ride from San Jose to Siquirres. Terminal Caribenos was a depressing place. The front of the station was littered with beggars and taxis. The ride took about two and a half hours if there were no accidents or construction. It could easily turn into five hours.

The bus follows route thirty-two, a major highway in Costa Rica called la carretera de las lágrimas _the highway of tears_. that runs right through the centre of Costa Rica, essentially cutting a path from east to west. The views are phenomenal along the highway as it goes from steep mountain ranges to open vistas of the Caribbean. One can experience a handful of micro climates on that short bus ride. This region of Costa Rica has garnered a reputation as being the narco capital. This stems from the port city of Limon which is where much of the country's commerce and drugs flow in and out of.

Upon arrival in Siquirres the man I was living with, Alexander, would meet me there in the Suzuki samurai we loaned him. Siquirres is a small town along the Caribbean side of Costa Rica. This region of Costa Rica has garnered a reputation as being the narco capital. Stemming from the port city of Limon which is where much of the country's commerce and drugs flow in and out of. It doesn't take much time in Siquirres to realize that it is not a place you would want to stay after dark. They refer to it now as the heart of the Caribbean. There is not any local attraction for tourists as it has never been developed as a tourist destination. They refer to it now as the heart of the Caribbean as they are modernizing the region with larger roads and more policing in what I can only aassume is an attempt to draw in tourists. Of all my years in this region I can count on one hand the tourists I've seen, typically making a pit stop on their way to Puerto Viejo.

I hopped in the Suzuki and Alex would drive us up to the mountain. We continue along route thirty two since it is the only highway that exists in this part of Costa Rica. It was initially constructed as a way for the local farmers to transport their goods throughout Costa Rica. There was a large concentration of dark skinned Caribbean people brought here to work on the railroad. For many years they were not allowed to leave this region of Costa Rica as Costa Ricans retain a high degree of racism even in this modern era. A stark contrast to our inclusive nature in North America. As we drove down Route thirty two it would take about twenty five minutes to arrive at the base of the mountain. Along the way little pueblos line the side of the road extending out to the coast. These are very simple communities, looking similar to favelas one could see in Brazil. Many homes contain entire families ranging from grandparents to grand children. It would take another fifteen minutes to get up to the part of the mountain that we were building our property. The drive up is astonishing as you make the climb up the views open up to nothing but nature. Within two minutes you are completely surrounded by greenery, sometimes giving way to picturesque vistas of the mountain ranges. Some of these views outclass most screensavers. The air is fresh, not even northern Canada could compare. The sounds of nature are so prominent they are like a chorus singing in unison at all times of day and night. Since it is a rain forest you can see clouds coming up from the dense jungle which seemed like magic having never even known that was possible at the time.

When we arrived at his home I was introduced to Alexander's entire family. At the time his father and mother were still with us and his siblings also lived on their ranch. They each had their own little home and a large plot for their horses to graze. I was staying with Alexander in his cabin which was raised off the ground about twelve feet above the ground being built upon stilts. I was informed that this was to prevent snakes and other threatening life from making its way inside. Upon first glance it became evident that no high degree of construction expertise was implemented in the construction. The gaps in the wood walls could sometimes be over an inch in width. The entire living space was no bigger than a North American living room, but was divided into two bedrooms and a common space. Having come from a suburb outside Toronto this was quite the wake up call. My bed consisted of a wooden platform with two pieces of foam serving as my mattress. Alexander slept in the room adjacent to mine with only thin slats of wood dividing us. I Knew it was gonna take some adjusting and I was happy to oblige. In the mornings, Maria, Alexander's mother, would cook for the entire family of three brothers and three sisters. She cooked for me as well. Most days we ate rice and beans with either eggs or meat, but that luxury was not always present. She would frequently prepare a form of sausage to go with the meal which I happily ate as it tasted quite good. I had eaten it about a dozen times before I was informed it was actually horse sausage. Considering it was one of my few sources of protein I wasn't one to complain. I Would spend my free time sitting on Alex's porch appreciating the view. I read a few good books and was relegated to living life as a mute considering my Spanish was not sufficient enough to sustain a conversation.

During my first week I was simply looking to source labor for the project and get a feel for the environment I was going to live in. On my third day I was asked to come look at some horses or that's what I thought I was being asked. When we arrived at what I thought was their collection of horses I witnessed a dead horse tied up to a living one and realized they were trying to get it to drag the corpse. The horse was not fond of this and refused to comply. That's why they required my aid. We grabbed the ropes tied off to the dead horses ankles and dragged it to the edge of the cliff. We then rolled it off the side and all I could think of was that it probably wouldn't be there in a couple days. Day by day my North American mindset was being demolished.

Sourcing labor would be the first of my issues. It began with the immediate family of the man I was living with. Within a week all the men I could've needed had heard about our necessity for workers. They would come and meet me on the porch of his little cabin and give me a brief rundown of their skill set. Much of what they said was lost on me so my basis for discerning who should get the job came down to physical shape and age. At first we started with eight men but then trimmed away two people as we realized there were too many hands in the kitchen. We begin work at 6 AM and would periodically take breaks as the sun can be very intense atop a mountain seated on the equator. First we dug a trench for irrigation which also served as a footing to lay the walls on. As we began constructing the walls on our first home work was slow, but as everyone became acquainted with the new construction method, including myself, the process quickly became rather efficient. All runs for material we're done by me and Alexander. Back then my Spanish being limited made ordering materials to be quite the endeavor. Every day I worked on my Spanish and every day it improved. I was working off the foundation I had from my Portuguese upbringing on my mother's side. Right from day one anyone that saw an opportunity to siphon money from the operation into their pocket would try to do so. At first this greatly offended us as we felt we were providing the best opportunity anyone had seen in years which still stands true to this day.

We would slowly learn over the years to come that this is not exclusive to us and is quite rampant amongst themselves. Nonetheless it will always be quite the spur in our backs. An example being that when ordering our first supply of gravel to fill the trench we dug Alexander stopped the truck on its way up the mountain and convinced the driver to add an extra charge to the bill and split it with him. At the time he thought my Spanish wasn't sufficient enough to understand but it was quite evident due to the context and his inability to be discreet. When we tried to address these issues they would play dumb and pretend they didn't know what we were talking about which was much easier to do back then as they could just pretend like they didn't understand us. This would be a persistent issue throughout construction and we would try to nip it at the bud as soon as possible. We also felt as though getting the property for half its value made up for the fact that we were being nickeled and dimed at every turn. Construction persisted and once the first ten courses of the wall went up my father sent a picture of it to a good friend of his in Canada. He immediately picked up on the fact that we missed one of the core aspects in building an interlocking wall. We had not even staggered the earth bags, which left unchecked would leave room for a high degree of structural instability. The walls had to be torn down which included two rows of barbed wire along every coursing and rebar driven in every meter of horizontal spacing and at every two coursings. My father was quite displeased with me and expressed as much upon my return to San Jose. I was quite disappointed with myself as I felt as though I had nailed this first attempt given the circumstances. Nonetheless after a brief hiatus work persisted and we rebuilt the walls. During the construction of the first house I had to return to Canada to work for the summer leaving three courses left for the workers to do themselves. This turned out to be an error on our part as we quickly realized these people could not be trusted to complete work on their own. When we subcontracted the roof to be done we were told that the final three courses had to be taken apart and redone. This did not take them long as they were getting paid for the job and not their time. The roof was impeccable and we provided no supervision. The family contracted to do the roof lived on the property for the week and we were quite impressed with the results. These people came from a small town known as Pejibaje. This is a very religious community and a small one that clearly took pride in their work.

Initially I would live with Alexander, our closest neighbor on the mountain and acquire the workforce necessary to build up our property. This proved to be a more difficult task than I had imagined, being a woefully ignorant nineteen year old suburban boy, yeah, I undertook the challenge as if it were a test of my endurance and ability to take on this world, so I ran with it, and in the end it has proven to be the single most enriching and fruitful experience I've ever had the luxury of indulging in. This journey sewed doubt in me at times and forced me to produce work even when circumstance made it seem impossible. I took residence with a man named Alexander as he was the man who sold us this parcel of land, amounting to approximately one hectare and he helped source labor for the construction of our first house, which ended up primarily being his family, with a couple of individuals who were not from the immediate family, but were associates or known entities. Once the manpower had been acquired, eight people at first, we went to work and with my limited knowledge in construction that I had acquired over a couple summers of interlocking and contracting work. This gave me a solid base to work with, but my only expertise in earth bag construction, which was our construction method of choice, was no more than a guidebook on how to build using earth bag. So envision a 19-year-old from the suburbs living in the dense tropical rain forest of Costa Rica, known as the Talamanca mountains, having to man a crew of grown men, some well into their 50's and building in a method that none of them had even heard of. I myself had never even attempted this method of construction prior to our undertaking of this project, I was happy to do it. . . at first. As construction underwent, there would prove to be many trials and tribulations that would pop up to impede our journey, but with a great deal of perseverance I am writing this from the confines of our earthbag house. It took a bit of work and a greater understanding of the Spanish language before I could confidently delegate to my workers and also keep my father properly informed as to the progress of construction. My father during the initial stages of construction, was living in San Jose, which is approximately 2 1/2 hours away from where I was working and living. That meant that should there be any issue medically, mentally or anything of the like, nobody would come for me that wasn't immediately in my vicinity. Many of these people I had only just met and I was putting my complete faith in them. These people are very simple, with a few of them being mostly illiterate and barely having an elementary level of education, nonetheless, their ability to come up with various methods for skimming money off of almost anything we did was astounding. As construction persisted, the issues were not only in sourcing supplies or other trivial matters pertaining to almost all aspects of construction, but it also turned out that the people we were working with we're always looking to skim a little bit of extra money for themselves, no matter what situation occurred, for example, Alexander decided that it would be a good idea to tell the driver of one of our supply trucks transporting crushed stone for the project, that he should tack on extra cost after negotiation was done, so that he could also skim some of the profit from the transportation and the goods. At the time he thought I could not understand, as my Spanish was limited, but even then, I understood what was happening and immediately informed my father who would periodically halt all work due to these manufactured interruptions. This mentality of trying to skim money from "El Gringo" every step of the way persists even to this day, although we've come a long way with those issues. There were problems stemming from my lack of experience. For example, we managed to construct about ten coursings of the walls before we realized that we hadn't even staggered the earth bags and for any of those who are not privy to basic construction methods, staggering your blocks or earth bags, in this case, is one of the core aspects of structural stability. Needless to say my father was quite angry about that when he realized, although he had seen photos of the progress and failed to realize himself, so all the work and all the walls had to be taken down and we were forced to start from scratch. In retrospect these mistakes served to only bolster our resolve and deepen our understanding, not without many an argument. We persisted and ended up cutting two workers from the crew as they were excess fat that needed to be trimmed. We started to get some degree of efficiency in the work and I managed to get every coursing of the walls up except for the last three courses before I returned to Canada. Those last three courses that were done after my departure turned out horribly, so much so that the people building the roof, who were professional contractors took it upon themselves to redo the last three coursings of the wall. This theme of laziness and lack of productivity under the lack of supervision and attempts to score extra money without actually providing any work or reason have always been an issue and will probably be an issue as long as we live in this country. Now when you take into account the amount of money everything cost, including the useless expenditure on these attempts to get money, it's hard to be too angry, as generally the whole process cost far less than it would in North America. Nonetheless, my father felt as though his money was being wasted in a lot of ways and I was hard-pressed to argue against that. I would leave every weekend to visit my father in San Jose to relay information and spend some time with an English-speaking individual, because as I stated before, my Spanish was limited, basically leaving me to be mostly a mute while living up here in Talamanca mountains. This was not a big issue for me as I typically can go large sums of time just reflecting inwardly, solitude is my fortitude as I like to say. Nonetheless, it took quite a toll and as my father will tell you, I was always keen to talk endlessly and about trivial matters upon my arrival in San Jose, simply for the sake of being able to speak English and communicate to any great degree. Now this may seem like I'm complaining or reflecting negatively upon the experience, but the experience served to heighten my ability to communicate not only in this new language, Spanish, but it also aided me greatly in all matters of communication. As I explain my journey I don't want anyone to think that I have any contempt or any regret for any part of it. I just wish to get across the difficulty and how much work it was to accomplish even the simplest of tasks or anything of substance. Let me tell you, when you do accomplish anything in this environment you must really take note and pat yourself on the back for a job well done, because not only is the climate brutal to work in but everything is made far more difficult trying to work with locals which is all I had. These people are now our family as my father has married in to the family that at one point served to stand in the way of our journey and this has only let up substantially over the last couple of years as my father has lived here in perpetuity for five years. yet even he still incurs this issue from time to time. One thing worth noting is that you cannot take it personally, as these people have a tendency to do these things to each other and when you see family nickel and diming one another you can't help but realize that it isn't simply you they're targeting, they do it to themselves.

All that being said I do have a tremendous respect for the way these people live and have adopted many of their qualities and lifestyle choices. One idea I wish to get across as I dictate my journey is that many of the trials and tribulations served only to bolster my character and resolve. I've grown fond of these people over the years and now call them family. Most of the construction is done and I am looking towards the future with a big smile on my face most of the time. Those moments where individuals and their ambitions for self centred desires are much easier to deal with a after having experienced what I've been through. It has become childish and trivial in nature. Once you see it in that light it becomes much more difficult to get angry or want to get even. One could say that we have come to a point where there is a bit of synergy between us foreigners on this mountain and many of the locals asserting many a time that we are one of them, montaneros no less. Now my new experiences are unlike anything one could pay for without embedding themselves deeply into another culture. Costa Rica has proven to be a wonderful country full of enriching experiences and people from all walks of life. It is a small country but I refer to it as the gem of Central America. I have been known to understate things from time to time so remember that even my most grandiose description of something is only a fraction of it's real glory. This is a constant theme throughout my journey here on the mountain, the duality of this existence being able to derive knowledge understanding compassion from negative experiences. Many in the west seem to think that negativity is to be avoided like the plague, well me and the stoics say it is to be confronted, digested and understood as when it's distilled into meaning it becomes the highest form of growth anyone can experience. Although I have seen much of the world and experienced many cultures it wasn't until I truly embedded myself in Costa Rica that I came to understand what it's like to try and adapt to another culture. As I continue through the journey the experiences get richer and more fruitful never ceasing to amaze me as it should be for all. What is astounding is that when you are experiencing some of these negative experiences you can not help but to be resentful, angry and hold the sting. After having time to reflect on it these emotions only serve to propel your growth.
